(♪♪)
>> It's okay, go.
Your turn.
>> It's my turn?
(♪♪)
>> We're hanging out with teens
today.
>> I got a strike.
>> Claire, Naomi and Katelyn
are helping us roll out a test
involving their favourite
accessory, cell phones.
>> Text away, snap chat away,
tweet your little fingers off.
>> Their parents are going to
hate us.
We're letting their kids use up
all the pricey data on their
family share plan.
>> Well ladies, start streaming.
Let's get this going.
>> We want to know will the
cell phone providers let them
rack up extra data charges
without their parents'
permission?
>> Gutter ball again.
Okay.
>> This mom says Bell sure
will.
We're in the Maritimes to hear
a cell phone saga.
>> I have a shocking story
about my Bell bill.
>> Rosemary pays for the family
cell phone.
To keep an eye on the bill she's
sold on a family share plan.
She shares voice, text and data
with her husband and two kids.
When her son goes over the
monthly data limit check out
how much extra it costs.
>> Over $1,700.
>> Charlsie: Yeah, you heard
that right.
>> Over $1,700.
>> Charlsie: That's called a
data overage charge.
>> I was shocked and asked how
could that happen.
>> Charlsie: How could it
happen?
Rosemary thought government
rules protected her from bill
shock.
How?
Once you go $50 over your data
is blocked.
To turn it back on you have to
approve, agree to pay the
higher fees.
>> Who approved it?
It wasn't me.
>> Charlsie: Her son approved
it.
Bell let him consent to those
higher fees.
She can't believe it and
disputes the $1700 charge.
>> They shouldn't have allowed
it to go over the data overages
without coming to me first.
>> Reporter: Rosemary pays the
bill so Bell says pay up.
>> I was mad.
I was pretty near in tears.
I mean you have other bills that
are coming in and how I will
end up paying for it?
Don't know.
>> Charlsie: Bell credits back
half the bill but not good
enough.
Rosemary doesn't want to pay a
dime.
>> Hi, Rosemary.
>> Hi, Mohammed.
>> So we hook her up with cell
phone bill buster Mohammed
Halibi.
>> So at no point were you
notified by any kind of message
or any kind of warning?
>> Not until I got the
telephone call and I was like
why did you wait until it was
1700 to call me.
>> This is so frustrating.
Your son, did he advise you
that he accepted the charges?
>> You know, he is not even
quite sure himself.
Of course I blamed him too at
the time.
I said what are you doing.
But I still stand by that
shouldn't be able to be done.
>> What was their response to
you.
>> They just said well the
other phone must have accepted
the charges.
I said how is it that they are
allowed to accept the charges.
I'm the account holder.
How can that be?
>> That's what Mohammed wants
to know.
He can't believe Bell lets kids
rack up big bills.
>> It's absurd.
It shouldn't be allowed.
>> Anyone with a family plan
you better like gather up your
kids' phones and keep them
tight to you.
>> Reporter: Not even this pro
can help Rosemary.
He says this is a case for the
CCTS.
They help customers settle
disputes and oversee the
government rules.
We asked the CCTS to make a
house call.
Howard maker is the
commissioner for complaints for
telecommunications services.
He makes sure companies and
customers know the rules.
The wireless code of conduct
says only individuals
subscribing to the service can
consent.
>> When it comes to family
share plans who can consent to
those data overages?
>> So in my view and in the view
of CCTS that's essentially the
person who pays the freight.
The person whose name is on the
account.
Pays the bill.
The person who is paying the
bill needs to be able to
control and manage what's going
on on that account.
>> To data.
>> Going over.
>> Charlsie: Back with our teen
testers who is paying the bills
here?
The parents of course.
>> Yeah, got you.
>> Will the cell phone
companies ask the parents or
the teens for permission to
rack up extra charges?
It's tempting.
>> Like everything I do on my
phone like pretty much involves
data.
So like, I kind of melt
without it.
>> It's a precious commodity
they must share with the family
and conserve.
>> My dad will always get mad
when I reach 90% of my data.
So it's just -- it's always the
same discussion about getting my
phone taken away or controlling
how much data I use.
>> Charlsie: But no worries
tonight, girls.
They are dining out on all you
can eat data thanks to us.
>> Am I stupid for doing this?
>> No.
>> Charlsie: Who is the first
to go over the limit?
>> Oh, I got a text.
>> What does it say.
>> It's from Bell.
So it says to help you manage
your mobile costs we have
temporarily blocked your data.
To unblock and continue to use
data open your mobile browser
and select accept.
>> So what you going to do?
>> I'm going to accept to
continue to go over my data.
>> It was just one click of a
button.
>> Charlsie: And a teen
confession.
It's not the first time she has
done this.
>> I have done this before.
And I would go on the Internet
and usually accept.
Yeah.
The worse that I racked up was
$300 over my data.
I did get in quite a bit of
trouble with my dad.
That was a very big argument.
>> Charlsie: And friend Kyla
also with Bell says she has
too.
>> Literally every time I go
over data, Kyla you are going
to lose your phone, Kyla you'll
lose all your privileges.
>> Charlsie: Moments later
Claire hits her limit too.
>> I just got a text from
Telus.
To unblock data and accept
further data charges, reply
yes to this message.
(♪♪)
>> It's cool, yeah, that you can
like keep going if you want to.
It's also like, kind of not
right in the sense of like,
my mom's paying it, I can just
say yeah let's keep going, let's
keep charging it up, and no
one else has to say anything.
>> Reporter: Bell and Telus let
the teens keep charging it up.
What about Rogers?
>> I got a text message from
Rogers.
>> Yeah, no problem.
Rogers sends her mom the same
text.
But what is the point?
Her daughter gets to accept the
extra charges anyway.
As for the Bell and Telus
parents, not even notified.
So we are notifying the
commissioner.
>> Minors were able to consent
to these over ages, consent to
turning the data back on.
>> It's a problem.
I think -- It doesn't impart
with our view with what the
code requires.
In letter or in spirit.
>> It does not.
>> Is that troubling to see
that teens can do this?
>> I certainly wouldn't want my
teens doing it and costing
folks money that they shouldn't
have to spend.
>> Charlsie: What's the penalty
for these cell phone companies
that are still doing this?
>> What we can do is we can talk
to the provider and try and get
them to change their practices.
You work with them but we
don't have the authority to tell
them how to do business.
>> What's the point of the code
if they can do what they want
then?
>> Well, I don't think they can
do what they want because
Anybody who has a problem with
this should contact us.
Should file a complaint with
us.
>> Oh my mom is calling me.
>> Charlsie: This parent might
soon be complaining about
Telus.
>> Claire confesses to going
over.
Mom had no idea.
>> Charlsie: Mom has a message
for Telus.
>> So they need to change their
policy or their process?
>> Charlsie: Guess what
parents, the big three won't
come on camera.
They think their policies are
just fine.
Believe it or not, even
though the CCTS disagrees
nothing it can do about it.
>> They are interpreting the
code in a way that's different
from the way we are
interpreting the code.
There is nothing that prevents
them from doing that.
>> Charlsie: So what would it
take to change the policy?
>> Well the only body that has
the authority to tell service
providers what to do is the
regulator.
>> Charlsie: That would be the
CRTC.
We are tracking them down next.
>> Get the real deal.
It's your Marketplace.
>> To data.
>> I'm over $10 now.
>> Oh yeah?
>> Charlsie: The big three cell
phone providers have let these
teenagers rack up extra data
charges without their parents'
permission.
>> Usually I do choose to go
over.
>> That shouldn't be allowed
says the CCTS.
It oversees the government
rules.
>> It's a problem.
I certainly wouldn't want my
teens doing it.
>> But Bell let's Rosemary's
son go way over the data limit
and it costs a lot extra.
>> $1,700.
I mean that's crazy.
Who approved it?
It wasn't me.
>> Charlsie: The CCTS says only
the account holder, the parent
can agree to extra data
charges.
Well the cell phone providers
disagree.
So what does the CRTC say?
We've been trying repeatedly
to get the telecom cops to come
on camera but they refused.
(♪♪)
Hey Siri.
>> Hey, Charlsie.
>> Can you call the CRTC in
Ottawa please.
>> Charlsie: We are trying one
more time to get some answers.
>> Please stay on the line to
leave a voice message.
>> Charlsie: Some companies do
seem to be violating the
wireless code of conduct.
We would like to know what
you're going to do about it and
what action you are going to
take to make sure they are
following the rules.
The CRTC won't come on camera
but it agrees, cell phone
companies shouldn't let kids on
family share plans approve
extra charges.
So far though, hasn't done a
thing about it.
(telephone dialling)
>> Hello.
>> How are you?
>> Meanwhile Rosemary can't
afford to wait for the CRTC.
She is warning her friends.
>> Just be careful with your
family share plans.
Because you don't have any
control over the other phones.
>> Okay.
>> So you don't want it
happening to you.
You are stuck with it.
And even though I didn't
approve it so I think it's
gouging anyway myself.
To charge that amount.
>> Charlsie: So why does it
cost so much more?
>> The amount for overages is
really ridiculous.
>> Charlsie: To find out we go
to the university of Waterloo.
>> Hello professor.
Can you stop.
>> Professor Srinivasan Keshav
is an expert in wireless
technology.
We show him Rosemary's bill.
There is $1700 in data overage
charges there.
>> That's quite a bit.
You consumed a lot of data.
About 18 movies worth.
>> Charlsie: Yeah, watching 18
movies on your cell phone can
cost $1700.
Works out to about $100 bucks a
movie.
That's the premium price
Rosemary pays when her son goes
over the data limit.
A huge mark up.
How big of a price hike is
that?
>> That's about 650% hike.
>> 650%?
>> That's right.
One would call this punitive.
>> Charlsie: That's a lot.
>> That's a lot.
>> Charlsie: Does it cost that
much more for the companies to
deliver the data when you do
go over your plan?
>> No, it doesn't.
>> Charlsie: So the cost is the
same.
>> The cost is the same to the
provider.
It's just what they choose to
charge for it.
>> Charlsie: And get this, in
the last few years those
overage prices have been jacked
way up from about $30 a movie
to $100 a movie.
And the question is why.
>> Prices are going down for
almost everything in the
technology world.
It's not clear why these prices
should be going up.
Why is it that consumers aren't
seeing that reduction in
their bills over time?
>> That's what everyone wants
to know.
>> I wish I could answer that.
I'm not an economist.
Cell phone companies and any
other company are there they
are not there for your benefit.
They're there to make a profit.
Let's get that straight.
>> Charlsie: We got it,
professor.
Here's a fun fact, total
revenue for the big three in
2015, more than $20 billion.
Another fun fact, we pay some
of the highest prices in the
world for data.
>> There should be much more
reasonable cell phone charges
in Canada, maybe a little bit
more competition.
There's always better pricing
when there is competition.
>> Charlsie: Rosemary's found a
way to end her bill shock.
She left Bell for a cheaper
provider who blocks data to her
kids' phones for free.
Claire's mom has another
solution to end her daughter's
data damage.
>> You know, this time next
year you'll be paying your
own bills so maybe you will
think about it.
>> Okay, well, I mean you know
next year I will still be in
your house.
>> You will.
(♪♪)
>> Charlsie: Want your money
back?
Find out how to complain to the
CCTS at CBC.CA/marketplace.